DA-161: Omnibot MAIV tutorial part 1 (#1264)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/projects/modernize-retro-robot.md

> linkTitle: "Modernize a 1980s Robot"

Author: I think I want to keep as-is, since there are probably a number of other 1980s robots that could be similarly updated...

weight: 60
type: "docs"
tags: ["base", "retro", "vision", "computer vision", "camera", "motor", "python"]
description: "Modernize a 1980s robot with Viam - Part 1"
image: ""

> images: []

Reviewer: You do still need these. I'd recommend using ezgif.com on the blinking video and turning that into a small gif, which you can then use for the images item and turn it into a video for the preview on the tutorials page. We can also do that for you, of course

Author: added

draft: false

> imageAlt: ""

Reviewer: no_list: true

Author: added

Author: added

<img src="../../img/maiv/maiv_switch_solder.jpg" alt="Omnibot MAIV switch wires soldered." class="alignright" title="Omnibot MAIV switch wires soldered." style="max-width: 150px;" />
</div>

#### Power switch and battery

Behind the battery panel door, you'll see a cover with 4 screws.
Unscrew the cover to access the circuit board.
We will use the top switch on this circuit board to power our robot.
Soldier two wires (50 cm each or so) to the outer top two pins on the backside of the switch.

We are not going to use any of the existing wires coming out of this switch panel, so you can cut them.
In case you want to connect to them later, leave enough length before the cut to do so.
Now, screw the cover back on with all wires extending out through the bottom of the cover.
Feed the two wires you just added into the center cavity of the robot through one of the openings at the back side of the battery panel.

If your battery pack does not have a barrel jack connector, you'll need to add one.
Cut off any existing connector, and solder the red wire of a male barrel connector pigtail to the positive battery wire, the black wire from the pigtail connector to the negative battery wire.

> Don't plug the battery in just yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}
Don't plug the battery in just yet.
{{< /alert >}}
```

Another 3-terminal quick connect will join one end of the power switch, the positive wire from the battery, and the positive wire from the charging port.

Finally, run the unconnected wire from the switch (the positive to power the robot) into the base through one of the holes in the top portion of the base (in the picture we have a 2-terminal quick connect in order to extend the length of our wire - yours is likely long enough to avoid this).

#### Connect the power sources to the motors and Pi

Working in the robot base, use a 4-terminal quick connector to connect the positive power supply wire (from the previous step) to the step down converter *positive* input wire.
Using a length of 18 gauge wire, connect another terminal in this quick connector to the 12V VCC screw terminal on the L298N motor driver to which you previously connected the base motors and pi.
One of the terminals to the quick connector is empty. This is expected, you will use it later.

Now use another 4-terminal quick connector to connect the negative power supply wire from the torso to the step down converter *negative* wire.

> Using a length of 18 gauge wire, connect another terminal in this quick connector to the GND screw terminal on the L298N motor driver to which you previously connected the base motors and pi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a length of 18 gauge wire, connect another terminal in this quick connector to the GND screw terminal on the L298N motor driver to which you previously connected the base motors and Pi.
```

As with the positive connector, one of the negative terminals will be left empty.

Finally, plug the USB-C output from the step down converter to the Raspberry Pi.

#### Power MAIV on

Now you can test that your the wiring is correct.
Ensure the power switch you just wired is off, and your battery is charged.
Plug the battery into the barrel connector inside the battery compartment, then turn on the power switch.
You should see LEDs on the motor driver and Pi light up!

{{% alert title="Troubleshooting" color= "info" %}}

If you do not see the LEDs light up, turn the power switch off.

Check your wiring, use a multimeter to ensure that your battery has enough power, and that the positive and negative polarity is as expected.

> You can also try unplugging the battery and powering instead with the wall adaptor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also try unplugging the battery and powering it instead with the wall adaptor.
```

{{% /alert %}}

> ### Base configuration

Reviewer: I recommend moving this to a higher order heading because some people will skip over the wiring tutorial and just want to see the code - we should make that easy:
```suggestion
## Add AI and Viam 
```

> Merging 40-year-old tech with modern tech to light up LEDs verges on exciting, but we need to configure our robotic base before we can get to the true prize of controlling MAIV through the internet and programmatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Merging 40-year-old tech with modern tech to light up LEDs is exciting, but we need to configure our robotic base before we can get to the true prize of controlling MAIV through the internet and programmatically.
```

Reviewer: I think still holds the meaning but sounds more positive

For now, turn the power switch to the off position.
In just a few minutes, you'll have it back on.

Go to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and create a new robot called `MAIV`.

Go to the **Setup** tab of your new robot's page and follow the steps [to install `viam-server` on your Raspberry Pi](/installation).

#### Configure the components

> {{< tabs >}}

Reviewer: very nice

Turn the head over, locate and unscrew the two screws holding MAIV's face plate.
You will be replacing the current incandescent bulbs with more energy-efficient LEDs that can be controlled directly from your Raspberry Pi.
In order to access the eye wiring, locate the screws on the underside of the head and unscrew them.

<div class="td-max-width-on-larger-screens">
<img src="../../img/maiv/maiv_eyes.jpg" alt="Omnibot MAIV eye plate." class="alignleft" title="Omnibot MAIV eye plate." style="max-width: 250px;" />
</div>

Remove the eye shield, unscrew the incandescent bulbs and screw in the LED bulbs.

The original wires to the eye bulb sockets won't be long enough to reach the Raspberry Pi.
Cut the original wires (leave some length) and strip the ends.
You will control both eyes at once, so use a 3-terminal quick connect to connect both eyes positive wires and a third long breadboard wire.
Repeat the same with another 3-terminal quick connect for the negative wires.

Now, run the long breadboard wires to through the robot neck, torso, and into the base.

With the robot powered off:

* Plug the positive breadboard wire into pin 1 on the Raspberry Pi (3.3V).

> * Plug the negative breadboard wire into pin 18 (GPIO 24) on the Pi.

Reviewer: just for my education: why isn't this going from GPIO to ground?

Author: Either would work - discussion here: https://forums.raspberrypi.com/viewtopic.php?t=234598

Reviewer: thanks!

Power your robot back on to test the eyes.
You will use GPIO directly to control the eyes through the `board` component you already configured.
Once viam-server is running (it will take a minute or so to initialize), go to the **Control** tab and open the *local* board card.
From here, you can test MAIV's eyes by setting GPIO pin 18 to high (to turn the eyes on) or low (to turn the eyes off).

> {{<video webm_src="../../img/maiv/maiv_eye_test.webm" mp4_src="../../img/maiv/maiv_eye_test.mp4" alt="MAIV eye flashing test" max-width="300px">}}

Reviewer: just curious: is it the motors that are loud?

Author: Good question!  I was trying to remember that myself (I recorded these videos a month ago) - I think it was perhaps some fan or heater I had running in the background.  The motors are loud in the Omnibot but they were not on here....

#### Connect and test the neck motor

The Omnibot 2000 has a motor that allows the head to turn from side-to-side.
This motor is a simple DC motor like those found in its base; the motor is not encoded nor is it a stepper motor so precise control is not an option.

You will notice that there are two wires that are running to some sort of limit switch and two wires that are running to the motor.
Ignore those running to the limit switch.
Extend the wires running to the neck motor through the torso and into the base.

Again, power off your robot.

> Take a another L298N motor driver and using a screwdriver, attach the 2 wires from the neck motor to the `OUT1` and `OUT2` terminals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take another L298N motor driver and using a screwdriver, attach the 2 wires from the neck motor to the `OUT1` and `OUT2` terminals.
```

Then click **Create component**.

Next, select `local` for the board attribute.
Set `Max RPM` to 200.
Leave `Direction Flip` off.
Toggle `Type` to `In1/In2`.

Now, select `16 GPIO 23` for `A/In1`.
Select `37 GPIO 26` for `B/In2`.
Select `29 GPIO 5` for `PWM`.

Finally, add `local` to `Depends on`.

Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Raw JSON" %}}

If you are editing the configuration of MAIV using JSON directly, add the neck motor by adding the following within the components list in your configuration.

``` JSON
    {
      "type": "motor",
      "model": "gpio",
      "name": "neck",
      "attributes": {
        "max_rpm": 200,
        "pins": {
          "a": "16",
          "b": "37",
          "pwm": "29"
        },
        "board": "local"
      },
      "depends_on": [
        "local"
      ]
    }
```

Click **Save config** in the bottom left corner of the screen.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Power your robot back on and use the **Control** tab to test that the neck motor is connected properly and can be powered on and off.

#### Add a camera "nose"

> Before re-assembling MAIV, you will add a camera to your robot's face.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before re-assembling MAIV, you can add a camera to your robot's face.
```

{{<video webm_src="../../img/maiv/maiv_head_test.webm" mp4_src="../../img/maiv/maiv_head_test.mp4" alt="MAIV head test" max-width="300px">}}

## MAIV in the world

Now that you've wired, configured, and tested all the components, put MAIV back together:

* Screw the upper base to the torso.
* Screw the lower base to the upper base.

Now MAIV is ready to interact with the world!

{{<video webm_src="../../img/maiv/maiv_driving.webm" mp4_src="../../img/maiv/maiv_driving.mp4" alt="MAIV driving" max-width="350px">}}

Start by driving MAIV through the **Control** panel, then try writing some code.
A simple first exercise would be to have MAIV [drive in a square](/tutorials/get-started/try-viam-sdk/).
The same code that works with any configured base will work with MAIV, you'll just need to update the robot location, robot secret and any component names that differ in the code.

Since MAIV has a camera, you could also [set up a color detector](/tutorials/services/webcam-line-follower-robot/) or detect objects using a [machine learning model](/tutorials/projects/send-security-photo/).

> There's a lot more we can do with MAIV, and we'll dive into other areas in upcoming parts of this series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a lot more you can do with MAIV - for inspiration, check out our other [tutorials](/tutorials).
If you end up building your own MAIV or another retro robot, we’d love to hear - let us and the [Viam community](https://discord.gg/viam) know!
```

linkTitle: "Modernize a 1980s Robot"
weight: 60
type: "docs"
tags: ["base", "retro", "vision", "computer vision", "camera", "motor", "python"]
description: "Modernize a 1980s robot with Viam - Part 1"
image: ""
images: []
imageAlt: ""
# SME: Matt Vella
---

> From Star Wars to Short Circuit, Go-bots to Transformers - the 1980s was a time of mass propagation in pop culture of how robots might exist alongside us in the future.

Author: ```suggestion
From Star Wars to Short Circuit, Go-bots to Transformers - the 1980s was a time in pop culture where people thought a lot about how robots might exist alongside us in the future.
```

linkTitle: "Modernize a 1980s Robot"
weight: 60
type: "docs"
webmSrc: "/tutorials/img/maiv/maiv_front.webm"
mp4Src: "/tutorials/img/maiv/maiv_front.mp4"
images: ["/tutorials/img/maiv/maiv_front.gif"]
tags: ["base", "retro", "vision", "computer vision", "camera", "motor", "python"]
no_list: true
description: "Modernize a 1980s robot with Viam and AI"

> image: ""
> images: []

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[Quick wire connectors](https://www.amazon.com/Quick-Connect-Wire-Connectors-Kit/dp/B0BRQD257H/)|$25.00|Not required, but these make wire connections secure and simple.|
[Velcro tape](https://www.amazon.com/Double-Sided-Adhesive-Strong-Self-Adhesive-Fastener/dp/B07TVZB1GL)|$9.99|This will help us organize the components we add to the robot base.|

You'll also need some basic tools and supplies:

* Screwdrivers
* Drill and drill bits
* Wire cutters/strippers
* Soldering iron and solder
* Paper towels
* Window cleaner or other cleaner to remove dust, etc.
* Multimeter

## Introduce yourself to Omnibot 2000

<div class="td-max-width-on-larger-screens">
<img src="../../img/maiv/maiv_here.jpg" class="alignright" alt="The Omnibot 2000." title="The Omnibot 2000." style="max-width: 250px" />
</div>

Your Omnibot 2000 arrival will likely be both exciting *and* full of dust.
Get out your window cleaner and paper towels and get to know it while giving it a good cleaning.

The Omnibot is driven by two wheels on each side, with a third un-powered wheel per side.
The powered wheels have treads - you'll want to see if yours are intact and usable as they are important for traction.

> Ours were in decent shape - if yours are not you can find them for sale on [Ebay](https://www.ebay.com/sch/i.html?_from=R40&_trksid=p2334524.m570.l1313&_nkw=omnibot+2000+treads&_sacat=0&LH_TitleDesc=0&_odkw=omnibot+2000&_osacat=0) or 3D-printable at [Thingiverse](https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4779479).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ours were in decent shape - if yours are not you can find them for sale on [eBay](https://www.ebay.com/sch/i.html?_from=R40&_trksid=p2334524.m570.l1313&_nkw=omnibot+2000+treads&_sacat=0&LH_TitleDesc=0&_odkw=omnibot+2000&_osacat=0) or 3D-printable at [Thingiverse](https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:4779479).
```

</div>

#### Power switch and battery

Behind the battery panel door, you'll see a cover with 4 screws.
Unscrew the cover to access the circuit board.
We will use the top switch on this circuit board to power our robot.
Soldier two wires (50 cm each or so) to the outer top two pins on the backside of the switch.

We are not going to use any of the existing wires coming out of this switch panel, so you can cut them.
In case you want to connect to them later, leave enough length before the cut to do so.
Now, screw the cover back on with all wires extending out through the bottom of the cover.
Feed the two wires you just added into the center cavity of the robot through one of the openings at the back side of the battery panel.

If your battery pack does not have a barrel jack connector, you'll need to add one.
Cut off any existing connector, and solder the red wire of a male barrel connector pigtail to the positive battery wire, the black wire from the pigtail connector to the negative battery wire.

{{< alert title="Caution" color="caution" >}}
Don't plug the battery in just yet.
{{< /alert >}}

> #### Wire the power sources

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### Wire the power sources
```

need a space there
